Chapter 2 stripe.press/pca-2 Remembering: The Children on Charlie from Charles T. Munger Jr. On the last day of a family ski vacation in Sun Valley when I was 15 or so, my dad and I were driving back in the snow when he took a 10-minute detour to gas the red Jeep we were driving. He was pressed for time to have our family catch the plane home, so I was surprised to notice as he pulled into the station that the tank was still half full. I asked my dad why we had stopped when we had plenty of gas, and he admonished me, “Charlie, when you borrow a man’s car, you always return it with a full tank of gas.” My freshman year at Stanford, an acquaintance lent me his car, more because friends we had in common twisted his arm than because he knew me all that well. The tank was half full, and the Audi Fox was red. So I remembered the Jeep and topped up the tank before I brought the car back. He noticed. We’ve had a lot of good times since, and he stood as a groomsman at my wedding. After Stanford, I learned that on that vacation we had been staying at Rick Guerin’s house and driving Rick Guerin’s Jeep. Rick is one of my dad’s friends who, on his return to Sun Valley, certainly wouldn’t have been troubled, and was unlikely even to notice, if his Jeep had had less gas than when he left it. My dad still didn’t skip a point of fairness and consideration. So I was taught that day not only how to get a good friend but also how to keep one. from Wendy Munger My dad often used the forum of the family dinner table to try to educate his children. His favorite educational tools were the Morality Tale, in which someone faced an ethical problem and chose the correct path, and the Downward Spiral Tale, in which someone made the wrong choice and suffered an inevitable series of catastrophic personal and professional losses. His specialty was the Downward Spiral Tale. He could really warm to the topic of apocalyptic consequences. He used such extreme and horrific examples that we were often simultaneously groaning and laughing by the time he finished. He’s in a league of his own when it comes to describing negative outcomes and the lessons to be learned from them. His Morality Tales were more straightforward. I remember the story my dad told his kids, then ranging from age 5 to 25, about a financial officer at one of his companies who made a mistake that resulted in the loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars to the company. As soon as this officer realized his mistake, he went to the president of the company and told him about it. My dad told us that the president then said, “This was a terrible mistake, and we don’t want you ever to make another one like it. But people make mistakes, and we can forgive that. You did the right thing, which was to admit your mistake. If you had tried to hide the mistake, or cover it up for even a short time, you would be out of this company. As it is, we’d like you to stay.” I think back on this story every time I hear of yet another government official who chose the cover-up instead of the honest confession after making a mistake. I don’t know why I use the past tense in describing my dad’s educational efforts at the dinner table. His oldest children are heading toward their 60s, the table is now crowded with grandchildren, and he’s still using his distinctive style of storytelling to keep us on the side of the angels. We’re very lucky to have him at the head of our table. from William H. (HAL) Borthwick It has been a fascinating and wonderful 50 years (nearly) since Charlie and my mother were married. There were many opportunities that I offered Charlie for formative education. Here are a couple: Do the job right the first time This story goes back to Minnesota times. One of my jobs as a driving-age teen was to pick up and deliver the housekeeper from the town of Cass Lake. This wasn’t just a drive down the street; the boat had to be driven across the lake to the marina, where I would hop into the car to drive to town, and then the process was reversed. Part of my job in the morning was to pick up a newspaper while I was in town. Well, one day a big storm blew in: rain, waves, wind, etc., big time. With all the excitement and difficulty, I did get to town in the morning and returned with the maid, but I forgot the paper. Charlie and I had a one-second or so discussion after I answered the question “Where’s my paper?” in the negative. “Go back and get the paper and never forget it again!” So back I went through the storm to get the paper, bouncing in the waves with rain sheeting off the boat, thinking to myself that I wasn’t going to allow anything like this ever to happen again. Be responsible Charlie’s mother drove herself from Omaha to Minnesota each summer. When she was there, we used her car for errands. There was but one set of keys, and while I was playing with friends in a sailing boat on the lake, the keys fell out of my pocket into 5 feet of murky water. I went home and confessed. Of course, in the Great North Woods, there aren’t many locksmiths, and with Charlie, there wasn’t patience for such stupidity. The solution, again in about a second, was: “Go out with your friends and keep diving till you get those keys, and don’t come home without them.” After about two hours of diving, with the sun sinking like a stone, the miraculous glint of metal in the weeds was before my eyes, and I could go home. There are a lot of these gems from Minnesota because, in those days when Charlie worked so hard and so long, that was the only meaningful time we spent with him. During the work weeks, he was off before dawn and home about dinner time, and then studied Standard & Poor’s and, later, would spend a couple of hours on the phone with Warren. from David Borthwick Many years ago, Father decided our Minnesota lake cabin absolutely had to have a tennis ball practice machine for the court that had been built a few years earlier. While he certainly wanted the children to groove their groundstrokes, there was a bit more to it than that. For it was Father who was out on the court more than anyone, with the machine positioned so he could endlessly practice-volley close by the net. Before long, he mastered the well-placed easy put-away volleys, the kinds of shots everyone else instinctively tried to kill but usually hit into the net or 10 feet out. By working on the tennis version of golf’s short game, which few others could be bothered to practice, Father, as he’s done throughout his life, gave himself a fair if maddening competitive advantage. I really dreaded playing against him, especially in doubles, where the net play really counts. Thank God it was tennis, not business. Thinking about Father made me remember a long-ago humorous TV beer ad in which a smartly dressed man at a table is so engrossed in his glass of beer as to be oblivious to a rampaging bull charging a bullfighter right in front of him. He doesn’t flinch, even when the bull smashes the table into matchsticks. The announcer’s tagline was “Try this beer for a truly unique experience,” or something like that. Take away the beer and substitute the financial market listings, architectural plans, or a scholarly biography of Keynes and you have a dead-on comedic take on Father night after night in his favorite chair poring over something, all but deaf to the roughhousing younger children, blaring TV, and Mom trying to summon him to dinner. Even when not reading, Father was often so deep in contemplation that a routine drive to take Molly and Wendy back to Pasadena could have turned into an excursion to San Bernardino without Mom calling out the correct freeway turnoffs. Whatever was on his mind, it wasn’t the outcome of a football game or a botched golf shot. Father’s ability to Chinese wall off the most intrusive distractions from whatever mental task he was engaged in—a practice alternately amusing and irritating if you were trying to get his attention—accounts as much as anything else for his success. from Molly Munger When I went to college in 1966, I was very lucky to have been thoroughly steeped in Daddy’s influence. In an angry and radical era, I would buy The Wall Street Journal or Fortune at the subway kiosk just outside the college gates, tuck it under my Oxford-cloth arm, and stride off to economics and business classes. People were occupying the dean’s office, going to jail. I was in the basement of the Lamont Library learning how to read a balance sheet. Daddy raised us to be skeptical, even contrarian, and that was a particularly helpful way of thinking to carry into the maelstrom of the late ’60s. Over many years, sitting in the library at our house on June Street, he had told us often funny stories of people who either followed the group too blindly or lashed out too reflexively. “Crazy,” “maladjusted,” “pompous,” “self-satisfied”—we knew from his adjectives what he thought we should avoid. In Minnesota, he found a way to hard-wire the same message into our very bodies. He had arranged for the old Larson Boat Works to make us an “aquaplane,” a heavy wooden affair we stood on as he towed it behind the boat. He would make sharp turns to see if we could hold on, and the only way to avoid the disgrace of a fall was to keep shifting our weight to compensate for the extreme angles. Then, and on into the future, I would always be viscerally terrified if it seemed any thought or activity was getting out of hand in one direction or another. When I was in college, Daddy had seven other children to raise, worked in a seedy part of Spring Street, and owned but one company, a small, grimy outfit that made motor additive. But he saw these were unhinged times. He sent me the allowance of a much richer father, keeping me in professionally ironed shirts and making me feel sharp as a bandbox. From 3,000 miles away, he continued to help me keep my balance. I could go on. Suffice it to say that our father has always known what he was doing, as a parent as in so much else. I appreciated it greatly. I still do. From Emilie Ogden “You have your father’s hands,” my husband remarked out of the blue, as we shared a glass of wine. I looked at him, a little stunned, not by the comparison but by his telepathy. I had been devising a short piece about my father, and the very subject had been on my mind. I had already noticed that my oldest son’s hands are like his grandfather’s, with fingertips slightly square and nail beds shaped like teacups rather than ovals. But it’s something about the way our hands take positions that first sparks the comparison. My father, my son, and I all cross our hands behind us in the same distinct manner, the left hand holding the wrist of the right, as we walk, minds elsewhere. “What is it about my hands, exactly, that reminds you of my father’s?” I asked. “It’s in the ‘U’ where your index finger curves into your thumb,” he said, showing me. “It’s the way you hold things there.” My father is holding his hands out above me. His fingers are curled, and his thumbs are pointing at each other, like handles on a bike. I reach my girl arms up straight, and I grasp each of his thumbs as he lifts me off the ground. I hang on, delighted, until my strength is spent. And when one child is too big for “thumbs,” there is always another, down through the line of grandchildren. Sometimes we’d get him to put down The Wall Street Journal and play “sandwich.” As he sits in the green armchair in the library, we pile on like the bacon, lettuce, and tomato of a BLT, his hands squeezing us together in a multilayered hug. My father holds a perfect chicken egg. We’ve won the father–­daughter egg toss, earning me one of my favorite possessions: a marble cube sprouting gilt acanthus leaves, with a life-size golden replica of an egg on top. This trophy sits on my desk, reminding me of the sunny day when my dad was so present and so gentle as to keep a flying egg from breaking in either of our hands. My father’s hands know the tensile strength of different fishing lines by feel. They tie on a chartreuse jig or a plain old hook. His hands rise to his lips where he cinches his knots with his teeth and bites off the extra line. His hands get wet reaching into tin bait buckets. They pinch twisting black leeches or one of Leroy’s famous minnows, “guaranteed to catch fish, or die trying.” His hands hold yellow-green Zingers, pickles so spicy-hot a bite will bring a laugh, and peanut butter-mustard sandwiches. My father’s hands rise early, with the rest of him, and appear at the edges of the business pages. In Minnesota, he might crumple this newsprint into loose balls, build kindling pyramids, strike long hearth matches, and press spade-shaped wooden bellows. With the fire lit, he might cook blueberry buckwheat pancakes on the Ben Franklin wood stove, using an old wood-handled spatula with chipped red paint. But if you play Password and give the clue “Charlie Munger’s hands,” anyone will first answer “books.” No matter where he is, his hands are always holding open a volume, typically a Ben Franklin biography or the latest treatise on genetics. One might also answer “graph paper,” for the buildings he’s been designing. When I think of my father’s hands, I also see them up on stage, in front of thousands in Omaha every year. His fingers encircle a Diet Coke, pinch peanut brittle or the stick of a Dilly Bar, or try to search incognito through a See’s Candies box, zeroing in on the rum nougat. His hands are crossed in front of him as he shakes his head, saying “I have nothing to add.” Or they move to the rhythm of a longer philosophical answer, making all the hands in the stadium clap together. My father’s hands, gesturing alongside every colorful joke and guiding story, have molded me as surely as a sculptor’s. I can be nothing but glad, and grateful, for the touch of my father’s hands in mine, and in my son’s. From Barry Munger Several years ago, I came across a book by Calvin Trillin called Messages from My Father , a memoir about Trillin’s father, Abe, who was born in Ukraine, grew up in Missouri, and spent much of his career operating neighborhood grocery stores in Kansas City. Abe Trillin regarded thrift as a moral virtue, paid his bills the day they arrived, and got up at 4 in the morning, six days a week, to pick the produce for his stores. A man of few words, he was nevertheless convivial, trenchantly funny, and spoke naturally to small children. He was skilled at cards. He was sardonic but had an underlying optimism that one could get along in the world with the proper outlook and character. The fact that my father shares many of these qualities, even if he’s not known for his discernment about produce, does not fully explain my attachment to this light, deft, and anecdotal little book. Reading it somehow conjures my father for me, even though in the broad outlines of his life my father has almost nothing in common with Abe Trillin, other than the fact that my father once worked part-time at a Midwestern grocery store, Buffett & Son in Omaha. Like my father, Abe Trillin had a fundamental reserve, partially Midwestern in origin, that was at odds with his personable qualities. He did not regard a long drive in a car or a fishing outing as an opportunity to catch up. He did not linger on the telephone. His son eventually came to marvel at “how much my father managed to get across to me without those heart-to-hearts that I’ve read about fathers and sons having in the study or in the rowboat or in the car.” The title Messages from My Father comes from the author’s surmise that his father must have been communicating his expectations through coded messages. “It’s possible that my father had a code so subtle that I didn’t know of its existence,” he writes. Anyone who knows my father knows that his manner of expression is not always subtle, but he has many ways of sending his messages. If he doesn’t like the way his bridge partner plays out a hand, for example, he might say, “You played that like a plumber,” but if he wants to offer serious counsel to one of his children, he is more likely to couch the message in an anecdote, preferably delivered in a group setting so that no one is singled out. In both instances, he appears blunt and avuncular—that inimitable Charlie—but at the card table, he uses a lack of indirection for harmless ribbing, and at the dinner table, he uses indirection to spare feelings. He’s more subtle than he appears. A friend of mine recently began an anecdote about my father by saying, “So your dad’s sitting in his chair, like Rushmore …” I knew exactly what he meant. Not many people can summon up the image of a 5,700-foot granite mountain and the faces of four presidents simply by taking possession of an upholstered chair, but my father can. All of the Munger children have at one time or another approached Rushmore to make a request and felt like Dorothy approaching Oz, except that Oz was more voluble. Rushmore did not always respond. Sometimes my father made a low steady noise from somewhere around his larynx, as though Rushmore had gone volcanic, but that was not so easy to interpret. Can you be more subtle than silent? Unlike Abe Trillin, perhaps, my father really does send messages, in the form of speeches he has written, letters he has received and sent, and articles from varied sources about social policy, psychology, business ethics, and law, among other topics. Many of them appear in this book. What doesn’t appear is the note my father scrawled on the enclosure. The note is usually extremely brief, and often just a “send to” list, but every once in a while the note will have a wry fillip, like this one from 1996, which was appended to a long, appreciative letter from a Berkshire Hathaway shareholder in Sweden: “I hope you find this amusing,” my father wrote. “If only I had the influence with my wife and children that I have in some other quarters!” When I finished the Trillin book, I sent it to my father. Even if he didn’t recognize himself in it, I figured he would enjoy the book’s Midwestern milieu, the immigrant striving of the Trillin family, and the humor. The book is written with so much affection that I thought I could even use it to communicate such feelings to my dad indirectly, which is the preferred route. At the very least, I thought the book might reassure my father that his messages were being received, even if they were not always heeded. About a week later, the book came back, in a padded envelope, with an address label supplied by his secretary. There was no note, so I wasn’t sure whether he had read the book or rejected it. It seemed untouched, so I concluded that my message had gone unreceived, loose pages tossed on Rushmore. Not much escapes my father, however. It turned out that he had simply instructed his secretary to send copies to the whole family. From Philip Munger Some of my most affectionate memories of my father are of shopping for clothes at Brooks Brothers and Marks & Spencer. Most people already know that Father is not a big fashion man. He once said that he was nonconformist enough in his behavior and opinions that it made sense to chart a very straight course in attire. His going along with normal social customs and his sense of humor, he said, were what allowed his otherwise sometimes prickly temperament to harmonize with other people. I vividly recall going with my father to Brooks Brothers, when it was still housed in that beautiful old wood-paneled building in downtown Los Angeles, to buy my first serious suit. I must have been about 11 or 12. I can see those polished brass elevator doors opening. We looked through the racks. Father picked out a pinstriped, charcoal gray suit. When I was 16, we went to buy another suit, this time a three-piece, which I wore religiously during my debate days. It kept the icy wind blowing off the lake at Northwestern during a tournament at bay. We bought, at the same time, a pair of wingtip shoes for my summer stint at The Daily Journal (a coming-of-age ceremony required by Father for each boy), shoes which have lasted to this day. There is another theme here. When we bought a brown tweed coat at Marks & Spencer in London, Father said, “This will always keep its crease.” He admired both stores because they were durable institutions and because their merchandise was too, and fairly priced. Durability has always been a first-rate virtue in my father’s view, along with ritual and tradition. He never had a desire to change his primary habits, sartorial or otherwise, once he had, like Franklin, acquired them. I still shop at Brooks, partly because each year at Christmas Father gives every child a gift card, which is perfectly timed for the winter sale. But I always end up going more often than that. One year, I used his largesse to purchase trousers with pleats. My father looked at them askance and said, “Do you want to look like a jazz drummer?” In New York, Brooks is still housed in its grand old building. I think of my father every time I go; I’m very attached to the place. When I went to study at Oxford, in winter 1988, he gave me an old Brooks coat of his, dating from the ’40s, of a sort of tannish-olive hue, I think, with a warm zip-in lining. As I walked home from the Bodleian Library each night, that nasty, damp, penetrating English cold would not get through. When I returned to the United States, I realized I had left the coat on a bus. I wept at the loss. Even now I wish I had that coat.