Appendix Endnotes Talk One: Harvard School Commencement Speech 1 A poet, philosopher, rhetorician, and humorist, Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BC) was also one of Rome’s great orators. Cicero viewed public service to be a Roman citizen’s highest duty. He defended those unjustly accused by dictatorial leaders and brought down corrupt governments. Late in life, he led the Senate’s unsuccessful battle against Mark Antony, for which he paid with his life in 43 BC. 2 Samuel Johnson (1709–1784), English author and the leading literary scholar and critic of his time, was celebrated for his brilliant and witty conversation. Johnson’s first work of lasting importance, and the one that permanently established his reputation, was his Dictionary of the English Language (1755). 3 One of the greatest poets of the English language, John Milton (1608–1674) was best known for his epic poem Paradise Lost (1667). His powerful prose and the eloquence of his poetry had an immense influence, especially on 18th-century verse. Milton also published pamphlets defending civil and religious rights. To Samuel Johnson’s point about Milton’s long-windedness, Paradise Lost runs to 12 books and thousands of lines. 4 Born in Corning, Iowa, Johnny (John William) Carson (1925–2005) became famous as America’s late-night king of comedy. He had a popular radio show in Omaha for years and claimed the city as his hometown. For 30 years, from 1962 to 1992, he entertained millions as the host of NBC’s The Tonight Show . His show featured thousands of authors, filmmakers, actors, singers—and stand-up comedians, of course, many of whose careers he launched. 5 Croesus (c. 620–546 BC), legendary for his huge wealth, was king of Lydia from 585 BC until his defeat by the Persians in about 546 BC. Upon capture, Croesus supposedly threw himself upon a funeral pyre. 6 At birth in Lincolnshire, England, Isaac Newton (1642–1727) was so tiny and frail that he was not expected to live. Yet he lived into his 80s. During his young adulthood, Newton made tremendous discoveries in general mathematics, algebra, geometry, calculus, optics, and celestial mechanics. Most famous among these discoveries was his description of gravity. The publication of his book The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy in 1687 marked the peak of Newton’s creative career. 7 Even though he was born a slave in Hierapolis and endured a permanent physical disability, Epictetus (55–135) maintained that all human beings are perfectly free to control their own lives and to live in harmony with nature. After intense study of the traditional Stoic curriculum of logic, physics, and ethics, Epictetus spent his entire career teaching philosophy and promoting a daily regime of rigorous self-examination. He eventually gained his freedom but was exiled from Rome by Domitian in 89. 8 James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879), born in Edinburgh, Scotland, demonstrated a very early interest in optics; a favorite childhood pastime of his was using a mirror to reflect the sun’s rays. His unusual mode of dress earned him the nickname “Dafty” at Edinburgh Academy. Nonetheless, he was a brilliant student, excelling in mathematics. He attended Cambridge University and joined its staff of lecturers following graduation. His interest in optics led him to study colors and astronomy. He also made significant contributions in the field of electromagnetism, including the first proposal that light is a form of electromagnetic radiation. 9 Albert Einstein (1879–1955) earned a teaching diploma from a Swiss university and, while working in the Swiss patent office in 1904, wrote his doctoral dissertation on a method to determine molecular dimensions. That same year and the next, he wrote several articles that form the foundation of modern physics. Topics included Brownian motion, the photoelectric effect, and special relativity. He went on to make major contributions to the development of quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and cosmology. He won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921. 10 Charles Darwin (1809–1882) was a British naturalist whose teachings on evolution by natural selection revolutionized the science of biology. His book On the Origin of Species sold out immediately and was heavily attacked because it did not support the depiction of creation given in the Bible. 11 Elihu Root (1845–1937), born in New York and the son of a mathematics professor, became one of the most brilliant administrators in American history. By age 30, he had established himself as a prominent lawyer specializing in corporate affairs. Shifting to public service, Root distinguished himself as secretary of war, secretary of state, US senator, and ambassador to Russia. In the interest of worldwide peace, he originated many treaties of arbitration. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1912. Talk Two: A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management and Business 12 Henry Emerson, editor and publisher of Outstanding Investor Digest , has spent 18 years interacting with some of the world’s greatest money managers, including both Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger. His indispensable news­letter is designed to “bring our subscribers the most valuable material that we can—the calendar be damned.” Emerson’s publication is a must-read for investors of every stripe. 13 Invited by French aristocrat Chevalier de Méré to help resolve a gambling dispute in the mid-17th century, mathematicians Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal laid the foundations for probability theory in a series of letters. De Méré’s question concerned bets on rolls of a die that at least one six would appear during four rolls. From experience, he knew he would win more often than lose at this game. As a diversion, he changed the game to a bet that he would get a total of 12, or a double six, on 24 rolls of two dice. The new game was less profitable than the old one. He asked the mathematicians to determine why this change occurred. 14 The C. F. Braun Company, a petrochemical engineering and construction firm, rose to prominence in the San Gabriel Valley in the early to mid-20th century. Along with competitors such as Fluor, Bechtel, and Parsons, Braun designed and built plants throughout the world. In the early 1980s, Braun was purchased by Santa Fe International, ably led by Ed Shannon. 15 Born in Iowa but raised in Wyoming from an early age, W. Edwards Deming (1900–1993) grew up in a four-room tar-paper shack. A serious student despite his impoverishment, he earned a PhD in mathematical physics from Yale. He took a job in the Department of Agriculture but eventually developed a love for statistical analysis. During World War II, wanting to help the war effort, Deming sought to apply statistics to manufacturing. American companies essentially ignored his ideas. Following the war, Deming went to Japan to teach Japanese managers, engineers, and scientists how to build quality into their manufacturing. Only after Japanese manufacturing skill became apparent to the rest of the world in the 1980s did Deming gain fame in his home country. The Deming Prize for quality was first awarded in Japan but is now recognized internationally. 16 Born John Francis Welch Jr. in Massachusetts, Jack Welch (1935–2020) earned a PhD in chemical engineering before joining General Electric in 1960. He worked his way up the corporate ladder, becoming chairman and CEO in 1980. During his 20 years of leadership at GE, Welch increased the value of the company from $13 billion to several hundred billion dollars. 17 Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936) was born in central Russia and attended seminary until age 21, when he abandoned theology in favor of chemistry and physiology. Earning his MD in 1883, he excelled in physiology and surgical techniques. Later, he studied the secretory activity of digestion and ultimately formulated the laws of conditioned reflexes. Pavlov’s most famous experiment showed that dogs tend to salivate before food is actually delivered to their mouths. This result led him to a long series of experiments in which he manipulated the stimuli occurring before the presentation of food. He thereby established the basic laws for the establishment and extinction of what he called “conditional reflexes,” later mistranslated from the original Russian as “conditioned reflexes.” He was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1904 for his work on digestive secretions. 18 Founded in 1962 by Sam Walton with just one store in Rogers, Arkansas, Walmart expanded to 24 stores in only five years. In 1970, Walmart moved its distribution center and corporate headquarters to Bentonville, Arkansas, its current home. Growth continued throughout the United States and abroad to today’s Walmart, which has well over 1 million employees, better than $250 billion in revenues, and a market capitalization that exceeds $200 billion. The company is well known for its slavish dedication to offering low prices to customers. 19 Dr. John Harvey Kellogg and his brother, William, were experimenting with new, healthy food items for patients at the Battle Creek Sanitarium in 1894 when they found that, by running boiled wheat dough through rollers and baking the result, they produced cereal flakes. William eventually began production of the new cereal product and, by 1906, was selling 2,900 cases per day. He continued to create new products and expanded the company into a breakfast food empire. Today, sales exceed $9 billion annually. 20 Patent : A grant made by a government conferring upon the creator of an invention the sole right to make, use, and sell that invention for a set period of time. An invention protected by such a grant. Trademark : A name, symbol, or other device identifying a product, officially registered and legally restricted to the use of the owner or manufacturer. A distinctive characteristic by which a person or thing comes to be known. Exclusive franchise : A right or license that is granted solely to an individual or group to market a company’s goods or services in a particular territory under the company’s trademark, trade name, or service mark, and that often involves the use of rules and procedures designed by the company and services (as advertising) and facilities provided by the company in return for fees, royalties, or other compensation; also, a business granted such a right or license. 21 In 1884, John H. Patterson founded the National Cash Register (NCR) Corporation, maker of the first mechanical cash registers. Two decades later, NCR introduced the first cash register powered by an electric motor. In the early 1950s, NCR branched into computer manufacturing for aviation and business applications. In the late 1990s, the firm shifted from a hardware-only company to a full-solution business automation provider. 22 The pari-mutuel system is a system of betting on races in which the winners divide the total amount bet, after deducting management expenses, in proportion to the sums they have wagered individually. 23 Frederick W. Smith was a Yale undergraduate student in 1965 when he wrote a term paper about the passenger route systems used by most airfreight companies. He saw the need for a system designed specifically for airfreight to accommodate time-sensitive shipments. In 1971, Smith bought a controlling interest in Arkansas Aviation Sales. Smith quickly witnessed the difficulty in getting packages and other airfreight delivered within one to two days. He did the research necessary to create a more efficient distribution system. Federal Express officially began operating in 1973 with 14 small aircraft based at Memphis International Airport; eventually, company headquarters moved to Memphis as well. Unprofitable until July 1975, FedEx soon became the premier carrier of high-priority goods in the marketplace and the standard setter for the industry it established. 24 Born in London, Benjamin Graham (1894–1976) migrated with his family to America when he was very young. His father opened an importing business that quickly failed. Despite the challenges of poverty, Graham attended and graduated from Columbia University. He took a job as a chalker on Wall Street with Newburger, Henderson & Loeb. His intelligence and capability were soon apparent, and by age 25, he was a partner at the firm. The 1929 market crash almost wiped out Graham, but he learned valuable lessons about investing. In the 1930s, Graham published a series of books on investing that became classics. Among these impressive titles are Security Analysis and The Intelligent Investor . Graham introduced the concept of intrinsic value and the wisdom of buying stocks at a discount to that value. 25 President of the Disney Company until his untimely death in 1994, Frank Wells (1932–1994) was greatly respected. For 30 years he carried a scrap of paper in his wallet that read, “Humility is the essence of life.” 26 Born in Leeds, England, to Polish immigrant parents, Simon Marks (1888–1964) spent his formative years roaming around his father’s retail store, Marks & Spencer. Following his graduation from the rigorous local grammar school (the equivalent of high school today), Marks went into the family business. At age 28, he was appointed chairman and led the Marks & Spencer Company into many retailing innovations and considerable financial success. Outside of his company obligations, Marks worked passionately for the reestablishment of a Jewish state. 27 In 1877, Stilson Hutchins launched The Washington Post . Three years later, the Post became the first daily newspaper in Washington to publish seven times a week. In 1946, Philip Graham became publisher; he moved up to president of the paper in 1959. The Post acquired Newsweek magazine and established a joint news service with The Los Angeles Times in the early 1960s. 28 King C. Gillette, a traveling hardware salesman who enjoyed improving the products he sold, learned early that disposable items made for big sales. In 1895, Gillette had a revelation: If he could put a sharp edge on a small square of sheet steel, he could market an economical razor blade that could be thrown away and replaced when it grew dull. In 1901, Gillette and William Emery Nickerson formed the American Safety Razor Company (soon thereafter renamed for Gillette himself). For the first time, razor blades were sold in multiple packages, with the razor handle as a one-time purchase. Production began in 1903; Gillette won a patent for his product the next year. 29 Leo and Lillian Goodwin started the Government Employees Insurance Company (GEICO) during the depths of the Great Depression in 1936. Their strategy of direct marketing allowed the company to charge lower premiums while earning a profit. The company grew quickly, even though it focused at first primarily on federal employees and military officers. GEICO soon expanded its market to the general public. In 1951, Warren Buffett purchased his first shares of the company. He kept acquiring stock through the years until, in 1996, GEICO became a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway. 30 Aristotle identified Thales of Miletus (620s–546 BC) as the first person to investigate the idea of a basic originating substance of matter, a distinction making him the founder of the school of natural philosophy. Thales of Miletus was interested in almost everything: philosophy, history, science, mathematics, engineering, geography, and politics. He proposed theories to explain many of the events of nature and the cause of change. His questioning approach to the understanding of heavenly phenomena was the beginning of Greek astronomy. He founded the Milesian school of natural philosophy and developed the scientific method. Talk Three: A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management and Business, Revisited 31 Adam Smith (1723–1790), born in a small village in Scotland, was an exceptional student and entered the University of Glasgow at age 14. He later attended Oxford, returned home to Glasgow, and began an academic career in logic and moral philosophy. His seminal work, The Wealth of Nations , remains the fountainhead of contemporary economic thought. Smith’s explanation of how rational self-interest drives a free-market economy greatly influenced thinkers and economists in his own day and in the generations that followed. His work forms the basis of classical economics. 32 The Little Red Hen is a classic fable teaching the value of self-reliance in connection with important things. Charlie’s advice on self-learning is reminiscent of Mark Twain’s classic line, “I have never let my schooling interfere with my education.” 33 Raised in rural central Pennsylvania and possessed of little formal education, Milton S. Hershey (1857–1945) became one of America’s wealthiest individuals. He started his own candy business, Lancaster Caramel Company, in 1876 and failed after only six years. Undaunted, he tried again and had great success. In 1893, he learned the art of chocolate making and started the Hershey Chocolate Company. As the company expanded into other food products, Hershey began to build the Pennsylvania town that bears his name. Hershey’s utopian ideas and principles continue to influence the company and the town. 34 Value Line’s mission is “to help investors get the most accurate and independently created research information available, in any format they choose, and teach them how to use it to meet their financial objectives.” In operation since 1931, Value Line has a solid reputation for reliability, objectivity, independence, and accuracy. Best known for the Value Line Investment Survey, the company publishes dozens of print and electronic research products. 35 In 1899, grocer E.A. Stuart cofounded the Pacific Coast Condensed Milk Company in the state of Washington based on the relatively new process of evaporation. Using a local tobacconist’s store name, Carnation, he had a brand for his new milk product. Through attention to processes and clever marketing, Carnation became associated with its “contented cows” and high-quality milk products. In 1985, the company was acquired by Nestlé. 36 Born in Montreal in 1954, Steven Pinker earned a degree in experimental psychology at McGill University and then moved on to Harvard for his doctorate. He has taught at Harvard and MIT at various times and is currently the Johnstone family professor in the Department of Psychology at Harvard. Pinker is interested in language and the mind, including the field of visual cognition, which encompasses the ability to imagine shapes and recognize faces and objects. He specializes in language development in children and has written many important papers and books on this and other topics. 37 Michael Faraday (1791–1867), the child of a blacksmith in England, was apprenticed at age 14 to a bookbinder and bookseller. He became a voracious reader, and his bookbinding duties also led him to the study of chemistry, at which he excelled. He discovered benzene and was the first to describe the compounds of chlorine and carbon. He also experimented with magnetism and electricity, leading him to produce continuous rotation using electric current—a necessary precursor to the electric motor. Faraday is also credited with the discovery of electromagnetic induction, principles of electrolysis, and a method to measure electrical charges, the voltameter. 38 Stanley Milgram, born in 1933 in New York, grew up during World War II, when Nazi atrocities became well-known to the world. He earned a political science degree from Queens College and went on to Harvard for a PhD in social relations. He took a faculty position at Yale, where he conducted a classic experiment that pitted the subject’s moral beliefs against the demands of authority. His experiment found that 65 percent of his subjects, ordinary residents of New Haven, were willing to give apparently harmful electric shocks to a pitifully protesting victim simply because a scientific authority commanded them to, despite the fact that the victim did nothing to deserve punishment. Milgram’s results have been used as a partial explanation for the German atrocities of World War II. 39 Born Burrhus Frederic Skinner in Pennsylvania to an attorney father and a strong and intelligent mother, B. F. Skinner (1904–1990) enjoyed school and did well enough to get to college. Following graduation, he wrote newspaper articles on labor problems and lived in Greenwich Village. Tiring of a bohemian lifestyle, he decided to return to Harvard, where he earned a PhD in psychology. Skinner’s great contributions to psychology are his experiments in operant conditioning and behaviorism. Operant conditioning can be summarized as follows: “A behavior is followed by a consequence, and the nature of the consequence modifies the organism’s tendency to repeat the behavior in the future.” 40 Born in Marton, England, James Cook (1728–1779) developed an early fascination for the sea and taught himself cartography. He served in the Royal Navy, participating in the siege of Quebec City and showing a talent for surveying and cartography. He mapped much of the entrance to the Saint Lawrence River during the siege. Later, he mapped the coast of Newfoundland, which brought him to the attention of the Royal Society, sponsor of many of his great voyages. In addition to having first-class cartographic skills, Cook developed excellent seamanship and displayed great courage in exploring dangerous locations. His voyages are chronicled in books that were extremely popular in his day and remain so today. 41 Serpico (1973) was a popular film directed by Sidney Lumet, based on the book by journalist Peter Maas. The plot concerns undercover police officer Frank Serpico, who does his best arresting criminals of all types, but especially drug dealers, despite working in a corrupt police department. Serpico refuses to accept bribes and becomes sufficiently appalled at his shady colleagues that he testifies against them, thus placing his life in jeopardy. Al Pacino appeared in the title role and earned an Academy Award nomination for his acting. The film was also nominated for a screenwriting Oscar. 42 Born András Gróf in Budapest, Hungary, Andy Grove (1936–2016) earned a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the City College of New York and a PhD from the University of California, Berkeley. He worked at Fairchild Semiconductor before becoming the fourth employee at the nascent Intel Corporation. He became Intel’s president in 1979, its CEO in 1987, and its chairman and CEO in 1997. Author of several academic and mass trade books, his 1996 work Only the Paranoid Survive was hugely popular. It’s on Charlie’s recommended book list. 43 An autocatalytic reaction (also called autocatalysis) occurs when a single chemical reaction product is itself the catalyst for that reaction. For example, tin pest is an autocatalytic reaction of the element tin; at low temperatures, it causes deterioration of tin objects. Atmospheric ozone depletion is another example of an autocatalytic reaction. 44 With the 1976 release of the Apple 1 by Steven Jobs and Stephen Wozniak, Apple Computer was born. Through a series of improvements and innovations, Apple built a reputation for quality and for the user-friendliest computers on the market. In the early 1990s, Apple began to lose its market share to Intel- and Windows-based computers. Despite what many observers maintained was superior technology and performance, Apple came close to irrelevance because of the marketing heft behind the Windows-based products. In the late 1990s, Apple’s iMac and PowerBook products began an impressive resurgence. 45 John Gutfreund (1929–2016), chairman and CEO of Salomon Brothers, paid a high price for inaction when he was put on notice of company misdeeds. In 1991, a Salomon trader made an illegal $3.2 billion bid for US treasury securities. Although the transaction was reported to top management only days later, Gutfreund did not take the warning seriously and failed to report it for more than three months. Gutfreund knew as soon as the matter came out in the press that his delay in reporting had torpedoed his 38-year career with Salomon. He called in one of Salomon’s outside directors, Warren Buffett, to save the company and restore its reputation. Buffett handled the complicated project masterfully, and the firm survived and prospered; it was later sold for $9 billion to Travelers. 46 Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1861), emperor of France, acquired control of most of western and central Europe by conquest or alliance until his defeat at the Battle of the Nations near Leipzig in 1813. He later staged a comeback known as the Hundred Days, before being defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. 47 The terms “modern Darwinism” and “modern Darwinian synthesis” describe work in the late 1930s and 1940s that blended the discoveries of geneticists and natural historians to determine how changes in genes could account for the evolution of biodiversity. 48 Born in Germany to a law professor father, Max Planck (1858–1947) earned his doctorate at age 21. His earliest work on thermodynamics evolved into an interest in radiation. From these studies, he was led to work on the distribution of energy in the spectrum of radiation. Planck’s work on energy emissions was essential to the field of physics and came to be known as quantum theory. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1918. 49 An ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, astronomer, and philosopher, Archimedes (c. 287–212 BC) had one of the greatest minds in antiquity. He discovered principles of density, buoyancy, optics, and, most famously, leverage. Of this last principle, Archimedes said, “Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum on which to place it, and I shall move the world.” Talk Four: Practical Thought about Practical Thought? 50 Galileo Galilei (1564–1642), born near Pisa, Italy, had early thoughts of joining a monastic order. Ultimately, though, his interests and education turned to mathematics and medicine, and he is credited with fundamental findings in pendulums, gravity, trajectories, and many other topics. He constructed the first astronomical telescope and used it to discover Jupiter’s satellites and the Milky Way. In 1633, he was brought before the Inquisition in Rome, placed under house arrest for the remainder of his life, and made to renounce his beliefs in solar-centric Copernican theory. Despite the trying circumstances, he continued work on his Discourses and mathematical demonstrations concerning the two new sciences and completed it in 1638. Smuggled out of Italy and published in Holland, the Discourses delineates most of Galileo’s contributions to physics. 51 Pythagoras (582–496 BC), an Ionian (Greek) mathematician and philosopher known as “the father of numbers,” is often credited with the discovery of irrational numbers. More likely, though, the credit belongs to one or more of his followers, the Pythagoreans, who produced a proof of the irrationality of the square root of two. Pythagoras, believing that numbers were absolute, rejected irrational numbers and is said to have sentenced their leading proponent to death by drowning for his heresy. Generally, an irrational number is any real number that cannot be written as a fraction a/b, with a and b integers and b not zero. For a number to be irrational, its expansion in any given base (decimal, binary, etc.) never ends and never enters a periodic pattern. 52 The model for Poor Charlie’s Almanack is, of course, Ben Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack . Franklin, as many know, was a polymath. Born in Boston and a leader of the American Revolution, he was a journalist, publisher, author, philanthropist, abolitionist, public servant, scientist, librarian, diplomat, and inventor. Using the pseudonym “Poor Richard,” Franklin published his Almanack from 1733 to 1758. Its contents varied, including not only many Franklin aphorisms that became famous but also calendars, weather forecasts, astronomical information, and astrological data. The Almanack was hugely popular in the American colonies, selling about 10,000 copies a year. 53 The drachma was originally a unit of currency in classical Greece. The word derives from the verb “to grasp.” The drachma was also used in ancient Rome in the third century BC and later. Most historians say one Roman drachma was equivalent to a day’s wages for a laborer. 54 Aristotle (384–322 BC), born at Stagira, a Greek colony, was son to a court physician for the king of Macedonia. Joining the Academy in Athens, Aristotle studied under Plato for 20 years. Diverging from Plato’s teaching, Aristotle ultimately established his own school, the Lyceum. Following Alexander’s death and the overthrow of his government, Aristotle faced charges of impiety and was forced to flee. He died exiled from Athens. Aristotle’s works include treatises on physics, metaphysics, rhetoric, and ethics. He is also known for his observations about nature and the physical world, which formed the basis for the modern study of biology. 55 Richard Thaler (b. 1945), born in New Jersey, earned his PhD at the University of Rochester. Serving professorships at Cornell and MIT in behavioral economics and decision research, he joined the faculty at University of Chicago in 1995. In addition to his work on behavioral economics and finance, he focuses on the psychology of decision-making. Talk Five: The Need for More Multidisciplinary Skills from Professionals: Educational Implications 56 William Tyndale (1495–1536), born in Gloucestershire, England, earned a degree from Oxford and became a priest. He found England hostile to his beliefs and spent time in Germany and Belgium, where he expanded his beliefs and spread the teachings of Martin Luther. His books having been burned, and his having become a continuing target of hostility, he nonetheless continued to publish Bible translations and other tracts. After months of imprisonment, he was condemned for heresy, strangled to death, and publicly cremated. Later, Tyndale’s translation formed the basis of the first royally approved English-language Bible and had great impact on the development of the English language. 57 Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947), a British philosopher and mathematician, worked in logic, mathematics, philosophy of science, and metaphysics. Whitehead is known for developing process philosophy, a view holding that fundamental elements of the universe are occasions of experience. In this view, concrete objects are actually successions of these occasions of experience. By grouping occasions of experience, something as complex as a human being can be defined. Whitehead’s views evolved into process theology, a way of understanding God. His best-known mathematics work is Principia Mathematica , cowritten with Bertrand Russell. 58 Encouraged by his parents to pursue his scientific interests, Linus Pauling (1901–1994) was a gifted student in Portland, Oregon, and won scholarships to Oregon State University. He went on to earn a PhD in chemistry at the California Institute of Technology, where he taught and carried out his research for the bulk of his career. Pauling made many contributions to his field, including applying quantum physics and wave theory to chemistry. He also made advances in antibody production and the atomic structure of proteins. Charlie believes he may have been the greatest chemist of the 20th century. He won Nobel Prizes for Chemistry (1954) and Peace (1962). Late in life, Pauling wrote about the role of nutrition in fighting disease and recommended the use of vitamin C to ward off the common cold. 59 Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827), a French mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher, discovered many key ideas relating to inductive reasoning and probability, celestial movement, and causal determinism. In his great work, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities , Laplace sets out one of his signature ideas: “We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.” 60 Roger Fisher (1922–2012) earned a law degree from Harvard in 1948 and stayed on as a faculty member in the law school. He became director of the Harvard Negotiation Project in 1980. An expert in negotiation and conflict resolution, he coauthored with Bill Ury Getting to Yes , a classic text in win-win negotiation techniques. 61 Richard P. Feynman (1918–1988) was born in Far Rockaway, New York. He earned an undergraduate degree in physics from MIT and went on to Princeton for a PhD. He worked on the Manhattan Project and was instrumental in the development of the atomic bomb. He held faculty posts at Cornell University until 1951 and then settled at Caltech. Feynman’s major contribution to physics was in quantum electrodynamics, the study of the interactions of electromagnetic radiation with atoms and more fundamental particles. He shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965. Late in life, Feynman was named to the commission that investigated the Challenger Space Shuttle accident. He demonstrated the effect of cold temperatures on rubber O-rings and showed how the resulting shrinkage allowed hot gases to escape, causing the explosion. Talk Six: Investment Practices of Leading Charitable Foundations 62 John C. Argue (1932–2002) divided his time between business and philanthropy. Long a senior partner of Los Angeles law firm Argue Pearson Harbison & Myers, he was one of the key reasons that Los Angeles got the 1984 Olympic Games. He also served on the University of Southern California Board of Trustees, becoming its chairman in 2000. 63 Bernie Cornfeld (1927–1995), born in Turkey, came to America and became a mutual fund salesman in the 1950s. In the 1960s, he started selling his own family of mutual funds, Investors Overseas Services (IOS), incorporated in Switzerland. He hired thousands of salespeople, who sold the funds door to door all over Europe, especially in Germany. IOS raised $2.5 billion while Cornfeld engaged in lavish personal consumption. 64 Long-Term Capital Management, a hedge fund company founded in 1994 by a well-respected Wall Street bond trader and two Nobel Prize winners in economics, developed complex mathematical models to take advantage of arbitrage deals. Using high levels of debt—about $125 billion by 1998—the fund was poorly positioned for two consecutive months of negative returns, combined with Salomon Brothers’ exit from the arbitrage business, combined with foreign financial panics. Within a few months, the fund lost almost $2 billion in capital. It became necessary for the Federal Reserve Bank to organize a bailout of the fund to avoid a chain reaction of liquidity requests throughout the economy. The debacle reminded the financial community of the potential seriousness of liquidity risk. The seminal book on the subject, When Genius Failed , was translated into many languages. 65 Robert W. Woodruff (1889–1985) was born in Georgia to a father who was president of a major trust company. Woodruff had an unremarkable school career, but once in the workforce he succeeded quickly. Although he started in car sales, by age 33 he had taken over the Coca-Cola Company. He turned a fairly small soft-drink manufacturer and bottler into a corporate giant known worldwide. Over the remainder of his life, Woodruff was unusually philanthropic and established a large foundation that now bears his name. Woodruff’s personal creed gives one a good sense of how he accomplished so much in his long life: “There is no limit to what a man can do or where he can go if he doesn’t mind who gets the credit.” 66 Peter F. Drucker (1909–2005), born in Austria, was educated there and in England. He earned a PhD in public and international law while working as a newspaper reporter in Germany. Later, he worked as an economist in a London bank and came to the United States in 1937. His academic career has included professorships at Bennington College, New York University, and, starting in 1971, Claremont Graduate University, where the graduate management school is named after him. For decades, he consulted for businesses and nonprofit organizations. Author of some 30 books on management, philosophy, and other topics, Drucker is considered a seminal thinker, writer, and lecturer on the contemporary organization. In 2002, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Talk Seven: Breakfast Meeting of the Philanthropy Roundtable 67 Founded in the 1970s in Washington, DC, the Philanthropy Roundtable is an informal network of grant-makers seeking to promote private, voluntary approaches to individual and community betterment. Currently, there are more than 600 Roundtable associates. 68 John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), son of an economics lecturer at Cambridge University and a social reformist, seemed destined to become a great economist and political thinker. His book, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money , published in 1936, advocated that government stimulate demand in times of high unemployment, for example by spending on public works. The book serves as the foundation of modern macroeconomics. 69 John Kenneth Galbraith (1908–2006), born in Ontario, Canada, graduated from Ontario Agricultural College and went on to obtain a PhD from the University of California, Berkeley. In 1949, he joined the economics faculty at Harvard University. A friend of President John F. Kennedy, Galbraith served as US ambassador to India from 1961 to 1963. As an economist, Galbraith held progressive values and wrote accessible books that often describe how economic theory does not always mesh with real life. Among his best-known works are American Capitalism: The Concept of Countervailing Power (1952), The Affluent Society (1958), and The New Industrial State (1967). Talk Eight: The Great Financial Scandal of 2003 70 Sophocles (496–406 BC), an ancient Greek playwright, dramatist, priest, and politician of Athens, is best known as one of the three great Greek tragedians (the others being Aeschylus and Euripides, with whom he often competed in dramatic contests). Sophocles wrote over 100 plays; many scholars, including Aristotle, considered him to be the greatest playwright in ancient Greek theater. The most famous of his surviving works are the tragedies of Oedipus Rex and Antigone . 71 One of the most famous examples of modern financial engineering was the Ponzi scheme, which started in Boston in 1919. Claiming an ability to exploit an unforeseen arbitrage in international postal coupons, Carlo “Charles” Ponzi attracted thousands of investors by promising 50 percent interest in 90 days. To build credibility, he used funds from recent investors to provide returns to earlier participants—a standard pyramid scheme tactic. Soon, Ponzi had taken in millions. In 1920, The Boston Post ran a story questioning Ponzi’s practices, which provoked an independent audit. The audit revealed the fraud, and investors demanded their money back. In the end, the average participant had only 37 percent of invested funds returned, and Ponzi spent several years in prison. Unrepentant, Ponzi turned up again in the late 1920s selling worthless land in Florida. Talk Nine: Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults after Considering Interdisciplinary Needs 72 Boltzmann’s constant derives its name from Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906); it defines the relation between absolute temperature and the kinetic energy contained in each molecule of an ideal gas. In general, the energy in a gas molecule is directly proportional to the absolute temperature. As the temperature increases, the kinetic energy per molecule increases. As a gas is heated, its molecules move more rapidly. This movement produces increased pressure if the gas is confined in a space of constant volume, or increased volume if the pressure remains constant. 73 N. Gregory Mankiw (b. 1958) studied economics at Princeton University, earned a PhD from MIT, and is on the faculty at Harvard University. In 2003, he was appointed chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. 74 Garrett Hardin (1915–2003), born in Dallas, spent his childhood in the Midwest. He earned an undergraduate degree from the University of Chicago and a PhD in biology from Stanford University. In 1946, he joined the faculty at UC Santa Barbara. His essay “The Tragedy of the Commons” became a staple of ecological thought. His philosophical and political positions influenced debates on abortion, immigration, foreign aid, and other issues for decades. 75 George Shultz (1920–2021), born in New York City, earned an undergraduate degree in economics from Princeton University and a PhD in industrial economics at MIT. Following several years on the MIT faculty, he moved on to the University of Chicago. He served as President Richard M. Nixon’s secretary of the treasury for two years until Nixon was forced to resign. President Ronald Reagan appointed him secretary of state in 1982; Shultz served both of Reagan’s terms. He is a member of the Hoover Institution and on the board of directors for the Bechtel Corporation, Gilead Sciences, and Charles Schwab & Company. During Arnold Schwarzenegger’s successful bid to replace California governor Gray Davis in 2003, Shultz was named an adviser to Schwarzenegger’s campaign. 76 Far less efficient than Munger’s preferred approach of simply “reaching down and picking up big nuggets of gold,” placer mining (pronounced “plass-er”) is an open-pit or open-cast form of mining in which miniscule amounts of valuable minerals are extracted from great volumes of earth using water pressure or surface excavating equipment. The name derives from the Spanish word placer , meaning “sand bank,” and refers to precious metal deposits (particularly gold and gemstones) found in alluvial deposits. 77 Joseph Rudyard Kipling (1865–1936), born in Bombay, India, to a father who taught at a local art school, attended boarding school in England. He returned to India and traveled around the subcontinent as a correspondent. He also wrote fiction and poetry, publishing The Jungle Book in 1894, Captains Courageous in 1897, and “Gunga Din” in 1892. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1907. 78 Leslie Schwab (1917–2007) was born in Bend, Oregon. After service in the Air Cadet Corps during World War II, he returned to Oregon and bought OK Rubber Welders, a small tire shop that he turned from a $32,000-a-year business into one generating $150,000 annually. In the 1950s, Schwab began expanding his business throughout the Pacific Northwest. Through innovations such as profit sharing, “super­market” product selection, and independence from the tire manufacturing companies, the company now operates over 300 stores with sales exceeding $1 billion annually. 79 David Ricardo (1772–1823), born in London, began working with his father at the London Stock Exchange at age 14. His wealth allowed him to retire young, and he secured a seat in Parliament. He became interested in economics after reading Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations and made many significant contributions to the field. Ricardo is often credited with the theory of comparative advantage, which explains why it can be beneficial for two countries to trade even though one of them may be able to produce every kind of item more cheaply than the other. The concept was first described by Robert Torrens in 1815 in an essay on the wheat trade, but Ricardo explained it more clearly in his 1817 book The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . 80 Adam Smith recorded in An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776) his observations at a pin factory. He found that only 10 workers were able to produce 48,000 pins per day because of divided and specialized labor. If each worker handled all the steps required to make a pin, he could only make 20 per day, for a total factory output of 200 pins daily. Smith recognized and extolled the great productivity gains and economic progress represented by the pin factory and its embrace of specialized labor. 81 Ronald Coase (1910–2013), born in a suburb of London, graduated from secondary school at age 12 and enrolled in the University of London only two years later. He earned degrees in law and economics and began research into transaction costs. He came to the United States in 1951 for an academic career that started at the University of Buffalo. He settled into the University of Chicago in 1964 and remains there as professor emeritus. His work “The Nature of the Firm” (1937) was cited as a major consideration in his receipt of the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1991. 82 Victor Niederhoffer (b. 1943) studied statistics and economics, earning an undergraduate degree at Harvard and a PhD at the University of Chicago. He taught at the University of California, Berkeley for five years and simultaneously ran Niederhoffer, Cross & Zeckhauser, Inc., involved in selling private firms to public companies. In the late 1970s, Niederhoffer started trading futures and options. He founded a trading firm, Niederhoffer Investments, in 1980 to provide financial management for institutional clients. He is also a past multiyear national squash champion. 83 The often-overlooked benefits of comparative advantage through free trade were famously revealed by David Ricardo in his 1817 book On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation : “In Portugal it is possible to produce both wine and cloth with less work than it takes in England. However, the relative costs of producing those two goods are different in the two countries. In England it is very hard to produce wine, but only moderately difficult to produce cloth. In Portugal both are easy to produce. Therefore, while it is cheaper to produce cloth in Portugal than England, it is cheaper still for Portugal to produce excess wine and trade it for English cloth. Conversely, England benefits from this trade because its cost for producing cloth has not changed but it can now get wine at closer to the cost of cloth.” Frequently overlooked is that Ricardo’s comparative advantage in delegating tasks among nations is equally applicable for managers delegating work. Even if a manager can perform the full range of tasks better himself, it is still mutually advantageous to divide them up. 84 Fra Luca de Pacioli (1445–1517) in 1494 published his seminal work, The Collected Knowledge of Arithmetic, Geometry, Proportion, and Proportionality . In one section of the book, Pacioli described a novel concept, double-entry accounting. This invention revolutionized business practice and made Pacioli a celebrity. His was one of the first books to be printed on the Gutenberg press. 85 The South Sea Bubble was an economic frenzy in England that occurred when speculation in South Sea Company shares peaked during 1720. The share price rose from £128 in January to a high of £1,000 in August and then fell back to £150 in September. The company had been granted exclusive trading rights in Spanish South America. When results ultimately proved skimpy, the company engineered a public debt scheme that appeared to bolster profits. Company leaders and other shareholders also talked up future revenues, causing the speculative frenzy. Public outcry following disclosure of the fraud led to imposition of the Bubble Act of 1720, requiring publicly traded companies to have a royal charter. 86 Bernard de Mandeville (1670–1733), philosopher and satirist, published a poem, “The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits,” in 1705 as a political satire. Mandeville’s philosophy suggests that altruism harms the state and its intellectual progress, and that self-interested human vice is the real engine of progress. Thus, he arrives at the paradox that “private vices are public benefits.” 87 Kurt Gödel (1906–1978), a logician, mathematician, and philosopher of mathematics from Austria-Hungary, wrote a dissertation for his PhD at the University of Vienna that included his famous, but somewhat obscure, incompleteness theorems. The first theorem holds that one can use the mathematical system to construct a statement that can be neither proved nor disproved within that system. The second theorem, arrived at by proving the first, states that no consistent system can be used to prove its own consistency. 88 In 1978, nearly two-thirds of California voters passed Proposition 13, which limits property taxes to 1 percent of a property’s market value and to 2 percent per year any increase in the property’s valuation assessment unless the property is sold. Prior to Proposition 13, there were no real limits on increases either for the tax rate or property value assessments in the state of California. Prop 13 set the stage for a broader taxpayer revolt that contributed to Ronald Reagan’s election as president in 1980. In the 2003 California gubernatorial recall election in which Arnold Schwarzenegger was elected, Schwarzenegger adviser Warren Buffett suggested that Proposition 13, still very popular with many homeowners, be repealed or changed to help balance the state’s budget. Politically, Buffett’s suggestion proved to be highly charged. Talk Ten: USC Gould School of Law Commencement Address 89 In Confucian thought, filial piety—a love and respect for one’s parents and ancestors—is a virtue to be cultivated. More broadly, filial piety means to take care of one’s parents; not be rebellious; show love, respect, and support; display courtesy; ensure male heirs; uphold fraternity among brothers; wisely advise one’s parents; conceal their mistakes; display sorrow for their sickness and death; and carry out sacrifices after their death. Confucius (551–479 BC) believed that if people could learn to fulfill their filial roles properly, they would be better able to perform their roles in society and government. To Confucius, filial piety was so essential he felt it transcended the law. In fact, during parts of the Han Dynasty, those who neglected ancestor worship according to filial piety precepts were subject to corporal punishment. 90 Of Human Bondage , William Somerset Maugham’s autobiographical 1915 novel, is generally considered his masterpiece. The protagonist, Philip, meets Mildred, a London waitress, who snubs him. Falling in obsessive love with Mildred, Philip knows he is foolish and despises himself. He gives Mildred all his money; she repays him with disgust and humiliation. As Maugham describes the relationship: “Love was like a parasite in his legs nourishing a hateful existence on his life’s blood; it absorbed his existence so intensely that he could take pleasure in nothing else.” 91 Joseph M. Mirra, MD, is a bone and soft tissue pathologist in the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. Dr. Mirra’s research interest is bone pathology, about which he has published more than 150 papers, produced 16 book chapters, and edited two books. Board-certified in anatomic and clinical pathology, Dr. Mirra is a sought-after visiting professor who also speaks nationally and internationally on bone pathology. He has been active in medical student teaching throughout his career and has participated in several symposia on bone tumor pathology. 92 The word “algebra” is derived from the Arabic word al-jabr , which appears in the treatise The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing , written in 820 by Persian mathematician Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī. The book provides systematic solutions of linear and quadratic equations. 93 The notion of Mozart as an impoverished composer comes primarily from a series of letters he wrote from 1788 to 1791 to his Masonic brother Michael Puchberg asking for loans. Other evidence suggests Mozart’s income, though subject to considerable fluctuation, was unusually high for a musician, placing him during some years in the top 10 percent of all Vienna inhabitants. Economists William and Hilda Baumol, on the other hand, calculate that Mozart’s income in the last decade of his life was middle-class at 3,000–4,000 florins a year (about $30,000–$40,000 in 1990). What happened to Mozart’s money? Mozart’s sickly wife, Constanze, required regular cures at spring baths used only by the wealthy. During lean times, the Mozarts continued to live in their accustomed style, giving themselves cash flow problems. The situation was exacerbated by their failure to save any money during flush periods and by a judgment against Mozart in 1791 resulting from a suit brought by Prince Karl Lichnowsky. Some scholars also cite evidence that Mozart gambled at billiards and cards. 94 Thomas Charles Munger (1861–1941) was born in Fletcher, Ohio, on the eve of the Civil War. His parents, itinerant farmers and schoolteachers, were so impoverished that as a child Judge Munger recalled trips to the butcher shop with 5¢ in his pocket to buy the lowest forms of animal parts the butcher had to offer. Despite this unfortunate beginning, Judge Munger managed to acquire an outstanding education owing both to his parents’ efforts and his own auto­didacticism. He was appointed United States District Judge by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1907 and became well known for both his industrious approach to legal research and the clear and concise form of his judicial opinions. 95 The Pilgrim’s Progress from This World, to That Which Is to Come (1678) by John Bunyan is an allegory regarded as one of the most significant works of English literature. Told by a dreamer, Pilgrim’s Progress follows the travels of a man, Christian, through a series of allegorical places: the Slough of Despond, the House Beautiful, the Valley of Humiliation, the Valley of the Shadow of Death, Vanity Fair, Doubting Castle, and so on, to the Celestial City that he seeks. Valiant-for-Truth is a strong, sword-wielding pilgrim who drives off three attackers single-handedly and joins Christian’s group at the end of its journey. Talk Eleven: The Psychology of Human Misjudgment 96 Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) rose from a penniless immigrant to become the wealthiest man on Earth. Selling his steel empire for $500 million, he created schools, a peace endowment, New York’s Carnegie Hall, and 2,811 free public libraries. He also paid for the acquisition and installation of 7,689 church organs. His vision was to create “an ideal state in which the surplus wealth of the few will become, in the best sense, the property of the many.” 97 From Luke 18:9–14 (King James Version): And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others: Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. 98 Judith Rich Harris (1938–2018) was an independent investigator and author. Her significant professional accomplishments include a mathematical model of visual speech, textbooks in developmental psychology, and many influential professional articles. She is best known for The Nurture Assumption (1998) and No Two Alike (2006).

Table of Contents Foreword by John B. Collison Foreword by Warren E. Buffett Rebuttal by Charles T. Munger Introduction by Peter D. Kaufman Chapter 1 : A Portrait of Charles T. Munger Chapter 2 : Remembering: The Children on Charlie Chapter 3 : The Munger Approach to Life, Learning, and Decision-Making Chapter 4 : Eleven Talks Talk One : Harvard School Commencement Speech Talk One Revisited Talk Two : A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management and Business Talk Two Revisited Worldly Wisdom, Updated: Q & A with Charlie Talk Three : A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management and Business Revisited Talk Three Revisited Talk Four : Practical Thought about Practical Thought? Talk Four Revisited Talk Five : The Need for More Multi­disciplinary Skills from Educational Profes­sionals: Implications Talk Five Revisited Talk Six : Investment Practices of Leading Charitable Foundations Talk Six Revisited Talk Seven : Breakfast Meeting of the Philanthropy Roundtable Talk Seven Revisited Talk Eight : The Great Financial Scandal of 2003 Talk Eight Revisited Talk Nine : Academic Economics: Strengths and Faults after Considering Interdisciplinary Needs Talk Nine Revisited Talk Ten : USC Gould School of Law Commencement Address Talk Eleven : The Psychology of Human Misjudgment Talk Eleven Revisited Appendix Endnotes Recommended Reading Acknowledgments Landmarks Cover Title Page Copyright Page Table of Contents Body Matter

Experience Poor Charlieâ€™s Almanack online at stripe.press/poor-charlies-almanack

For Charles T. Munger, who, in his own words, would tell you: “Acquire worldly wisdom and adjust your behavior accordingly. If your new behavior gives you a little temporary unpopularity with your peer group … then to hell with them.”

© 2023 PCA Publications LLC First edition published 2005 by The Donning Company Publishers Fourth abridged edition 2023 Illustrations © Ed Wexler Published in the United States of America by Stripe Press / Stripe Matter Inc. Stripe Press Ideas for progress South San Francisco, California press.stripe.com Printed by Hemlock in Canada ISBN 978-1-953953-23-0 (hardcover) ISBN 978-1-953953-24-7 (ebook) Library of Congress Control Number: 2023936297 Ebook by Legible Publishing Services Also available in audiobook.

Foreword Collison on Munger by John B. Collison Dublin April 2023 I first came across Poor Charlie’s Almanack in my 20s, when I was trying to learn everything I could about what made successful businesses tick. As I leafed through its oversize pages, I found it to be a refreshing rebuttal of conventional financial wisdom, delivered with unusual simplicity and candor. Never before had I heard a venerated business­person express such trenchant insights about investing, finance, and the world more broadly, and with such—to use a favored Munger phrase—chutzpah. One can’t help but read a line like “Without numerical fluency … you are like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest” and come away not only chuckling but also a little bit wiser. Years after that first encounter with “Poor Charlie,” I had the privilege of meeting Charlie at his home in Los Angeles. I was delighted to find that he is just as engaging and intellectually curious in person as he is on the page. (He also, I discovered, has considerably more sta­mina than I do—more than four hours into our dinner, I was ready for bed while Charlie showed no signs of flagging.) Our conversation that night was wide-ranging, touching on everything from the economics of ski resorts to raising children to the evolution of the news industry. Witnessing Charlie’s prodigious intellectual breadth and multidisciplinary mode of reasoning firsthand only reinforced my admiration both for the man himself and for this book. Poor Charlie’s Almanack is a testament to the power of thinking across disciplines. It’s not just a book about investing; it’s a guide to learning how to think for yourself to understand the world around you. Charlie’s philosophy combines insights from nearly every discipline in which he’s ever taken even a passing interest—not only business and finance but also mathematics, physics, history, ethics, and more—delivered with a characteristic irreverence that has persisted for 99 years (and counting). His essays extol the virtues of free enterprise, yes, but also of doing business the right way, with integrity and rigor. Of taking your work very seriously, but never yourself. While the world looks very different today than it did nearly 100 years ago, when Charlie was born in Omaha, Nebraska—arriving before the Great Depression, between two world wars, and just two years after the establishment of the Irish Free State—Charlie has remained a constant. His insatiable appetite for learning; his uncanny ability to evaluate businesses using simple frameworks that produce more reliable analysis than complex financial statements; and his partnership with the Buffett family—which started humbly when a teenage Charlie took a job in Warren’s grandfather’s grocery store and culminated in the one of the most successful investing relationships of all time—have persisted for decades, through boom times and bust. So, too, have many of the esteemed businesses in which Charlie and Warren invested their dollars and their confidence. Although Charlie didn’t invent the concept of compounding growth, his success, and that of Berkshire Hathaway, is a testament to its existence. The practical wisdom of Poor Charlie’s Almanack , this ode to curiosity, generosity, and virtue, will similarly compound, as successive generations of entrepreneurial readers extend his lessons to their own circumstances. Whether you are a seasoned investor or an enthusiastic new­comer, whether you run a business or are seeking to improve your decision-making skills in everyday life, I encourage you to read Charlie’s speeches and essays with an open, curious mind. You will be rewarded with insights that stay with you for a lifetime. As Charlie once said, “There is no better teacher than history in determining the future. There are answers worth billions of dollars in a $30 history book.” The same might be said of Poor Charlie’s Almanack . It is the ultimate value investment. I am immensely grateful to Peter Kaufman for compiling this classic tome, and to Charlie Munger for his irrefutable wisdom and his gracious mentorship. Nothing further to add.

Rebuttal Munger on Buffett by Charles T. Munger I think there’s some mythology in the idea that I’ve been this great enlightener of Warren. He hasn’t needed much enlightenment. I frankly think I get more credit than I deserve. It is true that Warren had a touch of brain block from working under Ben Graham and making a ton of money. It’s hard to switch from something that’s worked so well. But if Charlie Munger had never lived, the Buffett record would still be pretty much what it is. It’s hard to believe that he’s getting better with each passing year. It won’t go on forever, but Warren is actually improving. It’s remarkable: Most men in their 70s are not improving, but Warren is. Berkshire is drowning in money—we have great businesses pounding out money. When Warren is gone, the acquisition side of Berkshire will not do as well, but the rest will do well. And the acquisition side will do just fine. I think the top guy won’t be as smart as Warren. But it’s silly to complain, “What kind of world is this that gives me Warren Buffett for 40 years, and then some bastard comes along who’s worse?”

Foreword Buffett on Munger by Warren E. Buffett From 1733 to 1758, Ben Franklin dispensed useful and timeless advice through Poor Richard’s Almanack . Among the virtues extolled were thrift, duty, hard work, and simplicity. Subsequently, two centuries went by during which Ben’s thoughts on these subjects were regarded as the last word. Then Charlie Munger stepped forth. Initially a mere disciple of Ben’s, Charlie was soon breaking new ground. What Ben had recommended, Charlie demanded. If Ben suggested saving pennies, Charlie raised the stakes. If Ben said be prompt, Charlie said be early. Life under Ben’s rules began to look positively cushy compared with the rigor demanded by Munger. Moreover, Charlie consistently practiced what he preached (and oh, how he preached). Ben, in his will, created two small philanthropic funds that were designed to teach the magic of compound interest. Early on, Charlie decided that this was a subject far too important to be taught through some posthumous project. Instead, he opted to become a living lesson in compounding, eschewing frivolous (defined as “any”) expenditures that might sap the power of his example. Consequently, the members of Charlie’s family learned the joys of extended bus trips while their wealthy friends, imprisoned in private jets, missed these enriching experiences. In certain areas, however, Charlie has not sought to improve on Ben’s thinking. For example, Ben’s “Advice on the Choice of a Mistress” essay has left Charlie in the “I have nothing to add” mode that is his trademark at Berkshire annual meetings. As for myself, I’d like to offer some “Advice on the Choice of a Partner.” Pay attention. Look first for someone both smarter and wiser than you are. After locating him (or her), ask him not to flaunt his superiority so that you may enjoy acclaim for the many accomplishments that sprang from his thoughts and advice. Seek a partner who will never second-guess you nor sulk when you make expensive mistakes. Look also for a generous soul who will put up his own money and work for peanuts. Finally, join with someone who will constantly add to the fun as you travel a long road together. All of the above is splendid advice. (I’ve never scored less than an A in self-graded exams.) In fact, it’s so splendid that I set out in 1959 to follow it slavishly. And there was only one partner who fit my bill of particulars in every way—Charlie. In Ben’s famous essay, he says that only an older mistress makes sense, and he goes on to give eight very good reasons as to why this is so. His clincher: “… and, lastly, they are so grateful.” Charlie and I have now been partners for 45 years. I’m not sure whether he had seven other reasons for selecting me. But I definitely meet Ben’s eighth criterion. I couldn’t be more grateful.

Introduction by Peter D. Kaufman You are about to embark on an extraordinary journey toward better investing and decision-making. You may arrive at a better understanding of life as well, all thanks to the wit, wisdom, speeches, and writings of Charlie Munger—this generation’s answer to Benjamin Franklin. Charlie’s unique worldview, what he calls his multi­disciplinary approach, is a self-developed model for clear and simple thinking—yet his concepts and models are anything but simplistic. Notice how well Charlie’s thinking stands the test of time: The earliest talk in this collection is almost 20 years old, yet it is as relevant today as the day he first delivered it. As you will soon discover, Charlie’s observations and conclusions are based on fundamental human nature, basic truths, and core principles from a wide range of disciplines. Throughout the book, Charlie reveals his intellect, wit, values, and no end of rhetorical flair. His encyclopedic knowledge allows him to cite references from classical orators to 18th- and 19th-century European literati to pop culture icons of the moment. Where else would you find Demosthenes and Cicero juxtaposed against Johnny Carson, or today’s investment managers set against Nietzsche, Galileo, and a “one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest”? Or how about Ben Franklin versus Bernie Cornfeld in a battle of worldly wisdom? Using self-deprecation and imagination to great effect, Charlie cheerfully compares himself to a counting horse, proposes “Glotz’s Sugared, Caffeinated Water” as a marketing-bereft label for Coca-Cola, and attests, “At least when I was young, I wasn’t a total klutz.” In one talk (“Practical Thought about Practical Thought?”), Charlie even takes on the challenge of building, from scratch, a $2 trillion business, and then walks us through his diverse mental models to accomplish that mighty feat. The quotes, talks, and speeches presented here are rooted in the old-fashioned Midwestern values for which Charlie has become known: lifelong learning, intellectual curiosity, sobriety, avoidance of envy and resentment, reliability, learning from the mistakes of others, perseverance, objectivity, willingness to test one’s own beliefs, and many more. But his advice comes not in the form of stentorian admonishments; instead, Charlie uses humor, inversions (following the directive of the great algebraist [Carl] Jacobi to “invert, always invert”), and paradox to provide sage counsel about life’s toughest challenges. Charlie also employs historical and business case studies to great effect. In these presentations, he makes his points with subtlety and texture, often using a story-like context instead of abstract statements of theory. He regales his audience with humorous anecdotes and poignant tales rather than with a blizzard of facts and figures. He well knows, and wisely exploits, the traditional role of the storyteller as a purveyor of complex and detailed information. As a result, his lessons hang together in a coherent latticework of knowledge, available for recall and use when needed. It is clear throughout these talks and speeches that Charlie places a premium on life decisions over investment decisions. His mental models, drawn from every discipline imaginable, recur repeatedly, and in no way focus on “business portfolio strategy” or “beta” or “CAPM.” Rather, they center on fundamental truth, human accomplishment, human foibles, and the arduous path to wisdom. Charlie once said, “I wanted to get rich so I could be independent, like Lord John Maynard Keynes.” Independence is the end that wealth serves for Charlie, not the other way around. ABOUT THE BOOK We open with a portrait biography that chronicles Charlie’s progress from a modest Omaha childhood to prodigious financial success. Next, we summarize the Munger approach to life, learning, decision-making, and investing. This section details both Charlie’s unconventional way of thinking and his extraordinary work ethic—the twin fonts of his amazing success. In the balance of the book, Charlie speaks to his audience via speeches and talks he gave over a 20-year period. In the expanded third edition of the book, we added a new talk Charlie delivered at the USC Gould School of Law Commencement on May 13, 2007. So the original Ten Talks have grown to become a not-so-round Eleven Talks. These speeches and addresses cover a wide spectrum of Charlie’s interests, ranging from how one acquires worldly wisdom to how his multiple mental models can be applied to business to how the investment strategies used by charitable foundations can be improved. The 11th talk is a special rendition of “The Psychology of Human Misjudgment” that Charlie created especially for this book. Each talk is well worth your time not only for the enjoyment it will provide you but also for what you can absorb from the rich assortment of ideas and practices that Charlie relies on. You will probably never find a better opportunity to learn from someone so smart—and so forthright. In his talks, Charlie simply opens up and tells it like it is. A special note: Charlie’s redundancy in expressions and examples is purposeful; for the kind of deep “fluency” he advocates, he knows that repetition is the heart of instruction. A word about the style and layout of the book: Charlie is enormously curious about nearly everything he bumps into in life. Accordingly, as we ourselves bumped into people, places, and subjects mentioned by Charlie in his talks, we supplemented his text with related information. The endnotes peppered throughout the talks serve to explain concepts, add a supporting voice, or emphasize an important Munger idea. We hope these will not only inform but also amuse and even encourage you to further pursue these subjects on your own. I wish you good reading and an appreciation of the brightness and dry humor that those of us who know Charlie Munger have come to treasure and expect from him.