Chapter 3 stripe.press/pca-3 The Munger Approach to Life, Learning, and Decision-Making Despite being largely self-taught, Ben Franklin was spectacularly successful in such diverse fields as journalism, publishing, printing, philanthropy, public service, science, diplomacy, and inventing. Much of Franklin’s success was due to the essential nature of the man—most especially his appetite for hard work, but also his insatiable curiosity and patient demeanor. Above all, he possessed a quick and willing mind that enabled him to easily master each new field of endeavor he chose to undertake. It is not surprising that Charlie Munger considers Franklin his greatest hero, for Munger is also largely self-taught and shares many of Franklin’s unique characteristics. Like Franklin, Charlie has made himself into a grandmaster of preparation, patience, discipline, and objectivity. He has parlayed these attributes into great success in both his personal and business endeavors, especially in his investing. To Charlie, successful investing is simply a by-product of his carefully organized and focused approach to life. Warren Buffett once said, “Charlie can analyze and evaluate any kind of deal faster and more accurately than any man alive. He sees any valid weakness in 60 seconds. He is a perfect partner.” Why does Buffett proffer such high praise? The answer lies in the markedly original approach Munger applies to life, learning, and decision-making—the principal subject of this overview. A word to the wise before we begin: Given the complexity of Charlie’s approach, what follows is not intended as a how-to lesson for the aspiring investor. Instead, it is a general overview of how he seems to do it. Our goal here is to present the basic outline of Charlie’s approach to prepare you for the voluminous details that follow in the rest of the book. If you are anxious to get to the heart of the matter, the Eleven Talks section—presented verbatim in Charlie’s own words—is the best source for exacting how-to advice on a broad range of topics. Here we will content ourselves with a presentation of the general thought processes Charlie employs when considering an investment, followed by an outline of his guiding investment principles. Munger’s “multiple mental models” approach to business analysis and assessment Charlie’s approach to investing is quite different from the more rudimentary systems used by most investors. Instead of making a super­ficial stand-alone assessment of a company’s financial information, Charlie conducts a comprehensive analysis of both the internal workings of the investment candidate as well as the larger, integrated ecosystem in which it operates. He calls the tools he uses to conduct this review his multiple mental models. These models, discussed at length in several of the talks (especially Talks Two, Three, and Four), serve as a framework for gathering, processing, and acting on information. They borrow from and neatly stitch together the analytical tools, methods, and formulas from such traditional disciplines as history, psychology, physiology, mathematics, engineering, biology, physics, chemistry, statistics, economics, and so on. The unassailable logic of Charlie’s ecosystem approach to investment analysis: Just as multiple factors shape almost every system, multiple models from a variety of disciplines, applied with fluency, are needed to understand that system. As John Muir observed about the interconnectedness of nature, “When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.” Charlie seeks to discover the universe hitched to each of his investment candidates by gaining a firm grasp on all, or at least most, of the relevant factors comprising both its internal and external environment. When properly collected and organized, his multiple mental models (about 100 in number, he estimates) provide a context, or lattice­work, that leads to remarkable insights as to the purpose and nature of life. More pertinent to our purpose here, his models supply the analytical structure that enables him to reduce the inherent chaos and confusion of a complex investment problem into a clarified set of fundamentals. Especially important examples of these models include the redundancy and backup system models from engineering; the compound interest model from mathematics; the breakpoint, tipping moment, and autocatalysis models from physics and chemistry; the modern Darwinian synthesis model from biology; and cognitive misjudgment models from psychology. The net result of this broad-spectrum analysis is a heightened understanding of how the many factors affecting an investment candidate blend and link to one another. Sometimes this understanding reveals the existence of second-order, ripple, or spillover effects. Other times the factors employed combine to create enormous “lollapalooza-level” results, good or bad. By applying this framework, Charlie lives in a different world from most investors when it comes to investment analysis. His approach accepts the reality that investment problems are inherently complex, and in a manner more in keeping with the rigors of scientific inquiry than conventional investing, he attacks them with a staggering degree of preparation and broad-based research. Charlie’s “big ideas from the big disciplines” approach to investment evaluation is certainly unique in the business world—as is its origin. Not finding any existing approach adequate to the task, Charlie painstakingly created his own largely self-taught system. The “self-taught” statement is no exaggeration; he once said, “To this day, I have never taken any course, anywhere, in chemistry, economics, psychol­ogy, or business.” And yet these disciplines, especially psychology, form the foundation upon which his system is built. It is this signature approach, backed by Charlie’s formidable intellect, temperament, and decades of relevant experience, that have made him the virtuoso of business pattern recognition so valued by Buffett. Like a chess grandmaster, through logic, instinct, and intuition, he determines the most promising investment moves, all the while projecting the illusion that the insight came easily, even simply. But make no mistake: This simplicity comes only at the end of a long journey toward understanding—not at the beginning. His clarity is hard-won, the product of a lifetime of studying the patterns of human behavior, business systems, and a myriad of other scientific disciplines. Charlie counts preparation, patience, discipline, and objectivity among his most fundamental guiding principles. He will not deviate from these principles, regardless of group dynamics, emotional itches, or popular wisdom that “this time around it’s different.” When faithfully adhered to, these traits result in one of the best-known Munger characteristics: not buying or selling very often. Munger, like Buffett, believes a successful investment career boils down to only a handful of decisions. So when Charlie likes a business, he makes a very large bet and typically holds the position for a long period. Charlie calls it “sit-on-your-ass investing” and cites its benefits: “You’re paying less to brokers, you’re listening to less nonsense, and if it works, the tax system gives you an extra 1, 2, or 3 percentage points per annum.” In his view, a portfolio of three companies is plenty of diversification. Accordingly, Charlie is willing to commit uncommonly high percentages of his investment capital to individual, “focused” opportunities. Find a Wall Street organization, financial adviser, or mutual fund manager willing to make that statement! Given Charlie’s record of success, not to mention Buffett’s endorsement, why aren’t his investment practices more routinely emulated by others? Perhaps the answer is that, for most people, Charlie’s multidisciplinary approach is simply too hard. Further, few investors share Charlie’s willingness to appear foolish by not following the herd. Religious in his objectivity, Charlie is content to swim imperturbably against the tide of popular opinion—indefinitely, if necessary—which is a rare attribute in the average investor. And while this behavior can at times appear simply stubborn or contrarian, that is not the defining characteristic. Charlie is simply content to trust his own judgment even when it runs counter to the wisdom of the herd. This lone-wolf aspect of Charlie’s temperament is a rarely appreciated reason why he consistently outperforms the larger investment community. Indeed, if temperament chiefly arises from inborn tendencies, it may be that hard work, intellect, and experience, regardless of their intensity, are by themselves insufficient to make a great investor like Charlie Munger. As we shall witness throughout the remainder of this book, the right kind of genetically predetermined wiring is needed as well. At the 2004 Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, a young shareholder asked Buffett how to succeed in life. After Buffett shared his thoughts, Charlie chimed in: “Don’t do cocaine. Don’t race trains. And avoid AIDS situations.” Many would dismiss his seemingly flippant answer as merely humorous (which it certainly was), but in fact it faithfully reflects both his general views on avoiding trouble in life and his particular method for avoiding missteps in investing. Often, as in this case, Charlie generally focuses first on what to avoid—that is, on what not to do—before he considers the affirmative steps he will take in a given situation. “All I want to know is where I’m going to die, so I’ll never go there” is one of his favorite quips. In business, as in life, Charlie gains enormous advantage by summarily eliminating the unpromising portions of the chessboard, freeing his time and attention for the more productive regions. Charlie strives to reduce complex situations to their most basic, unemotional fundamentals. Yet, within this pursuit of rationality and simplicity, he is careful to avoid what he calls physics envy, the common human craving to reduce enormously complex systems (such as those in economics) to one-size-fits-all Newtonian formulas. Instead, he faithfully honors Albert Einstein’s admonition: “A scientific theory should be as simple as possible, but no simpler.” Or, in his own words: “What I’m against is being very confident and feeling that you know, for sure, that your particular action will do more good than harm. You’re dealing with highly complex systems wherein everything is interacting with everything else.” Another Benjamin—Graham, not Franklin—played a significant role in forming Charlie’s investing outlook. One of the most enduring concepts in Graham’s The Intelligent Investor is Mr. Market. Usually, Mr. Market is a temperate and reasonable fellow, but some days he is gripped by irrational fear or greed. Graham cautioned the investor to carefully use his own unemotional judgment of value instead of relying on the often manic-depressive behavior of the financial markets. Similarly, Charlie recognizes that even among the most competent and motivated of people, decisions are not always made on a purely rational basis. For this reason, he considers the psychological factors of human misjudgment some of the most important mental models that can be applied to an investment opportunity: Personally, I’ve gotten so that I now use a kind of two-track analysis. First, what are the factors that really govern the interests involved, rationally considered? And second, what are the subconscious influences where the brain, at a subconscious level, is automatically doing these things—which, by and large, are useful but which often misfunction? One approach is rationality, the way you’d work out a bridge problem: by evaluating the real interests, the real probabilities, and so forth. And the other is to evaluate the psychological factors that cause subconscious conclusions, many of which are wrong. For more specifics on this topic see Talk Eleven, in which Charlie applies mental models from the field of psychology to illustrate 25 common causes of human misjudgment. Obviously, the methods described to this point can’t be learned in a university classroom or on Wall Street. They were developed by Charlie, from scratch, to satisfy his own exacting requirements. They probably deserve a title of their own, something like “Quickly eliminate the big universe of what not to do; follow up with a fluent, multidisciplinary attack on what remains; then act decisively when, and only when, the right circumstances appear.” Is it worth the effort to develop and adhere to such an approach? Charlie seems to think so: “It’s kind of fun to sit there and outthink people who are way smarter than you are because you’ve trained yourself to be more objective and more multidisciplinary. Furthermore, there is a lot of money in it, as I can testify from my own personal experience.” Munger’s investment evaluation process As we’ve noted, Charlie doesn’t make a lot of investments. His approach is perhaps best summarized by Thomas Watson Sr., the founder of IBM: “I’m no genius. I’m smart in spots, and I stay around those spots.” If Charlie knows anything, he knows his spots: his carefully identified circles of competence. To stay within these circles, he first applies a basic, overall screen, designed to limit his investment field to only “simple, understandable candidates.” As he says, “We have three baskets for investing: yes, no, and too tough to understand.” To identify potential “yes” candidates, Charlie looks for an easy-to-understand, dominant business franchise that can sustain itself and thrive in all market environments. Understandably, few companies survive this first cut. Many investor favorites such as pharmaceuticals and technology, for example, go straight to the “too-tough-to-understand” basket. Heavily promoted “deals” and IPOs earn immediate nos. Those that do survive this first winnowing are subjected to the screens and filters of Charlie’s mental-models approach. The process is intense and Darwinian but also efficient. Charlie detests placer mining, the process of sifting through piles of sand for specks of gold. Instead, he applies his “big ideas from the big disciplines” to find the large, unrecognized nuggets of gold that sometimes lie in plain sight on the ground. Throughout his exhaustive evaluation, Charlie is no slave to a database: He takes into account all relevant aspects, both internal and external to the company and its industry, even if they are difficult to identify, measure, or reduce to numbers. His thoroughness, however, does not cause him to forget his overall ecosystem theme: Sometimes the maximization or minimization of a single factor (notably specialization, as he likes to point out regarding Costco’s discount warehouses) can make that single factor disproportionately important. Charlie treats financial reports and their underlying accounting with a Midwestern dose of skepticism. At best, they are merely the beginning of a proper calculation of intrinsic valuation, not the end. The list of additional factors he examines is seemingly endless and includes such things as the current and prospective regulatory climate; the state of labor, supplier, and customer relations; the potential impact of changes in technology; competitive strengths and vulnerabilities; pricing power; scalability; environmental issues; and, notably, the presence of hidden exposures. (Charlie knows that there is no such thing as a riskless investment candidate; he’s searching for those with few risks that are easily understandable.) He recasts all financial statement figures to fit his own view of reality, including the actual free or owners’ cash being produced, inventory and other working capital assets, fixed assets, and such frequently overstated intangible assets as goodwill. He also completes an assessment of the true impact, current and future, of the cost of stock options, pension plans, and retiree medical benefits. He applies equal scrutiny to the liability side of the balance sheet. For example, under the right circumstances, he might view an obligation such as insurance float—premium income that may not be paid out in claims for many years—more properly as an asset. He especially assesses a company’s management well beyond conventional number crunching—in particular, the degree to which they are “able, trustworthy, and owner-oriented.” For example, how do they deploy cash? Do they allocate it intelligently on behalf of the owners or do they overcompensate themselves or pursue ego-oriented growth for growth’s sake? Above all, he attempts to assess and understand competitive advantage in every respect—products, markets, trademarks, employees, distribution channels, societal trends, and so on—and the durability of that advantage. Charlie refers to a company’s competitive advantage as its moat: the virtual physical barrier it presents against incursions. Superior companies have deep moats that are continuously widened to provide enduring protection. In this vein, Charlie carefully considers competitive destruction forces that, over the long term, lay siege to most companies. Munger and Buffett are laser-focused on this issue: Over their long business careers they have learned, sometimes painfully, that few businesses survive over multiple generations. Accordingly, they strive to identify and buy only those businesses with a good chance of beating these tough odds. Finally, Charlie seeks to calculate the intrinsic value of the whole business and, with allowance for potential dilution, etc., to determine an approximate value per share to compare to market prices. This latter comparison is the fundamental purpose of the whole process—comparing value (what you get) with price (what you pay). On this subject he is famous for his viewpoint that “a great business at a fair price is superior to a fair business at a great price.” Warren Buffett often credits Charlie with convincing him of the wisdom of this approach: “Charlie understood this early. I was a slow learner.” Charlie’s insight helped Buffett move from pure Benjamin Graham–­style investing to focusing on great businesses such as The Washington Post , GEICO, Coca-Cola, Gillette, and others. Though extremely thorough, Charlie is able to ignore insignificant detail and the distractions to which others sometimes fall victim. Investment variables, just like all other variables, go through their own process of elimination. By the time he is finished with his analysis, he has reduced the candidate to its most salient elements and achieved a remarkable degree of confidence about whether or not to act. The evaluation, finally, becomes not so much mathematical as philosophical. Ultimately a “feel” emerges, a function of both the analysis itself and Charlie’s lifetime of accumulated experience and skill in recognizing patterns. At this point, only an exceptionally superior investment candidate will still be in the running. But Charlie does not immediately rush out and buy it. Knowing that a necessary companion to proper valuation is proper timing, he applies yet a finer screen, a “prior to pulling the trigger” checklist, which is especially useful in evaluating what he refers to as close calls. The checklist includes such items as: What are the current price, volume, and trading considerations? What disclosure timing or other sensitivities exist? Do contingent exit strategies exist? Are better uses of capital currently or potentially available? Is sufficient liquid capital currently on hand or must it be borrowed? What is the opportunity cost of that capital? And so on. Charlie’s exhaustive screening process requires considerable self-discipline and results in long periods of apparent inactivity. But, as Charlie says, “Hard work is an essential element in tracking down and perfecting a strategy, or in executing it.” For Charlie and Warren, the hard work is continuous, whether it results in current investing activity or not—and usually it does not. This habit of committing far more time to learning and thinking than to doing is no accident. It is the blend of discipline and patience exhibited by true masters of a craft: an uncompromising commitment to “properly playing the hand.” Like world-class bridge player Richard Zeckhauser, Charlie scores himself not so much on whether he won the hand but rather on how well he played it. While poor outcomes are excusable in the Munger–­Buffett world—given the fact that some outcomes are outside of their control—sloppy preparation and decision-making are never excusable because they are controllable. On those relatively few occasions when all the circumstances are just right and Charlie does invest, he will likely make a large, decisive bet. He does not pick around the edges, take initial positions, or make small, speculative investments. Such behavior implies uncertainty, and Charlie’s moves, few as they are, are anything but uncertain. As he says, he practices “extreme patience combined with extreme decisiveness.” Charlie’s self-confidence is based not on who, or how many, agree or disagree with him but on his ability to objectively view and measure himself. This self-mastery affords him rare objectivity in gauging his actual knowledge, experience, and correctness of thought. Again, we see the important role played by the right kinds of temperamental qualities: self-discipline, patience, calm, independence. Charlie’s level of investment performance is arguably impossible without them. What makes a great business model for Charlie? His recommended reading materials provide some guidance. Guns, Germs, and Steel , The Selfish Gene , Ice Age , and Darwin’s Blind Spot all have a certain theme: a focus on the issue of competitive destruction and an examination of why some entities are nevertheless able to adapt, survive, and even dominate over time. When this theme is extrapolated into investment selection, the preferred Munger business emerges: some thrive by outcompeting (à la Selfish Gene ) and others by out-cooperating (à la Darwin’s Blind Spot ). Once again, we see Charlie’s rich fluency across a broad range of disciplines at work: How many investors ever consider, as Charlie routinely does, such a broad and sophisticated spectrum of factors? To name but a few, he routinely considers factors such as conversion, i.e., how the laws of thermo­dynamics intersect with laws of economics (for instance, how paper and petroleum become a newspaper delivered to a front door); psychological tendencies and incentives (notably the extreme behavioral pressures they create, both good and bad); and fundamental sustainability over time (the constant and often deadly interplay between positive factors such as moats and the ravages of competitive destruction). Charlie is possibly without peer when it comes to the checklist of atypical investment factors he considers and his deep fluency in the diverse disciplines from which they are drawn. An investing principles checklist We have now examined Charlie’s approach to thinking in general and to investing in particular. In keeping with our intent to observe how he seems to do it, we will recap his approach by using the checklist methodology he advocates. (For Charlie’s own words of wisdom on the value and importance of checklists, see Talk Five.) Note, however, that the following principles are most certainly not employed by Charlie in a one-by-one or one-time fashion as the checklist format might seem to imply. Nor can they necessarily be prioritized in terms of any apparent or relative importance. Rather, each must be considered as part of the complex whole or gestalt of the investment analysis process, in much the same way that an individual tile is integral to the larger mosaic in which it appears. Risk All investment evaluations should begin by measuring risk, especially reputational. Incorporate an appropriate margin of safety. Avoid dealing with people of questionable character. Insist upon proper compensation for risk assumed. Always beware of inflation and interest rate exposures. Avoid big mistakes; shun permanent capital loss. Independence “Only in fairy tales are emperors told they are naked.” Objectivity and rationality require independence of thought. Remember that just because other people agree or disagree with you doesn’t make you right or wrong—the only thing that matters is the correctness of your analysis and judgment. Mimicking the herd invites regression to the mean (merely average performance). Preparation “The only way to win is to work, work, work, work, and hope to have a few insights.” Develop into a lifelong self-learner through voracious reading; cultivate curiosity and strive to become a little wiser every day. More important than the will to win is the will to prepare. Develop fluency in mental models from the major academic disciplines. If you want to get smart, the question you have to keep asking is “Why, why, why?” Intellectual humility Acknowledging what you don’t know is the dawning of wisdom. Stay within a well-defined circle of competence. Identify and reconcile disconfirming evidence. Resist the craving for false precision, false certainties, etc. Above all, never fool yourself, and remember that you are the easiest person to fool. Analytic rigor Use of the scientific method and effective checklists minimizes errors and omissions. Determine value apart from price, progress apart from activity, wealth apart from size. It is better to remember the obvious than to grasp the esoteric. Be a business analyst, not a market, macroeconomic, or security analyst. Consider the totality of risk and effect; look always at potential second-order and higher-level impacts. Think forward and backward: Invert, always invert. Allocation Proper allocation of capital is an investor’s number one job. Remember that the highest and best use is always measured by the next best use (opportunity cost). Good ideas are rare—when the odds are greatly in your favor, bet (allocate) heavily. Don’t fall in love with an investment—be situation-dependent and opportunity-driven. Patience Resist the natural human bias to act. “Compound interest is the eighth wonder of the world” (Einstein); never interrupt it unnecessarily. Avoid unnecessary transactional taxes and frictional costs; never take action for its own sake. Be alert for the arrival of luck. Enjoy the process along with the proceeds, because the process is where you live. Decisiveness When proper circumstances present themselves, act with decisiveness and conviction. Be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are fearful. Opportunity doesn’t come often, so seize it when it does. Opportunity meeting the prepared mind—that’s the game. Change Live with change and accept unremovable complexity. Recognize and adapt to the true nature of the world around you; don’t expect it to adapt to you. Continually challenge and willingly amend your best-loved ideas. Recognize reality even when you don’t like it—especially when you don’t like it. Focus Keep things simple and remember what you set out to do. Remember that reputation and integrity are your most valuable assets—and can be lost in a heartbeat. Guard against the effects of hubris and boredom. Don’t overlook the obvious by drowning in minutiae. Be careful to exclude unneeded information or slop: “A small leak can sink a great ship.” Face your big troubles, don’t sweep them under the rug. Since human beings began investing, they have been searching for a magic formula or easy recipe for instant wealth. As you can see, Charlie’s superior performance doesn’t come from a magic formula or some business school–­inspired system. It comes from what he calls his “constant search for better methods of thought,” from a willingness to “prepay” through rigorous preparation, and from the extra­ordinary outcomes of his multidisciplinary research model. In the end, it comes down to Charlie’s most basic guiding principles, his fundamental philosophy of life: Preparation. Discipline. Patience. Decisiveness. Each attribute is, in turn, lost without the other, but together they form the dynamic critical mass for a cascading of positive effects for which Munger is famous (the lollapalooza). Finally, a word or two on why this overview of Charlie’s investment philosophy has focused so much on the subject of what to buy and so little on when to sell. The answer, in Charlie’s own words, serves as a wonderful summation of the Munger school of highly concentrated, focused investing described here: We’re partial to putting out large amounts of money where we won’t have to make another decision. If you buy something because it’s undervalued, then you have to think about selling it when it approaches your calculation of its intrinsic value. That’s hard. But if you can buy a few great companies, then you can sit on your ass. That’s a good thing. Like his hero, Benjamin Franklin, Charlie Munger painstakingly developed and perfected unique approaches to personal and business endeavors. Through these methods, and through the development and maintenance of sound, lifelong habits, he has achieved extra­ordinary success.