Recommended Reading Chernow, Ron . Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr . New York: Random House, 1998. Cialdini, Robert B . Influence, New and Expanded: The Psychology of Persuasion . New York: HarperCollins, 2021. Dawkins, Richard . The Selfish Gene . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016. Diamond, Jared M . Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies . New York: W. W. Norton, 2017. Diamond, Jared M . The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal . New York: HarperCollins, 1992. Firestone, Harvey S., and Samuel Crowther . Men and Rubber: The Story of Business . New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1926. Fisher, Roger, William Ury, and Bruce Patton . Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without Giving In . London: Random House Business Books, 2003. Franklin, Benjamin . The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin . North Carolina: IAP, 2019. Gribbin, John . Deep Simplicity: Bringing Order to Chaos and Complexity . London: Penguin Books Limited, 2009. Gribbin, John, and Mary Gribbin . Ice Age . London: Allen Lane/Penguin Press, 2001. Grove, Andrew S . Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit the Crisis Points that Challenge Every Company and Career . New York: Currency Doubleday, 1996. Hagstrom, Robert G . The Warren Buffett Portfolio: Mastering the Power of the Focus Investment Strategy . New Jersey: Wiley, 2000. Hardin, Garrett . Living within Limits: Ecology, Economics, and Population Taboos . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. Herman, Arthur . How the Scots Invented the Modern World: The True Story of How Western Europe’s Poorest Nation Created Our World and Everything in It . New York: Crown, 2001. Landes, David S . The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor . New York: W. W. Norton, 1999. Partnoy, Frank . Fiasco: The Inside Story of a Wall Street Trader . London: Penguin Publishing Group, 1999. Ridley, Matt . Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters . New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2005. Schwab, Les . Les Schwab Pride in Performance: Keep It Going . Oregon: Pacific Northwest Books, 1986. Segre, Gino . A Matter of Degrees: What Temperature Reveals about the Past and Future of Our Species, Planet, and Universe . London: Penguin Publishing Group, 2003. Simon, Herbert A . Models of My Life . London: MIT Press, 1996. Stone, Irving . Men to Match My Mountains: The Opening of the Far West, 1840–1900 . New York: Berkley, 1982. Wall, Joseph Frazier . Andrew Carnegie . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970. Wright, Robert . Three Scientists and Their Gods: Looking for Meaning in an Age of Information . New York: Times Books, 1988.

Acknowledgments This book is a survey of Charles T. Munger: his approach to learning, decision-making, and investing; his speeches; his zingers; and more. The impetus for the book came from the many people who, over the years, have said they wished one existed—and have done so with ever-increasing vigor at Berkshire and Wesco shareholder meetings, at dinner parties, on message boards, and many other places. Hearing this clamor, your editor, Peter Kaufman, suggested to Warren Buffett that a book be done and was encouraged to take it upon himself to make it happen. Illustrator and caricature artist Ed Wexler produced the illustrations in the book. The production team included Charles Belser, Debbie Bosanek, Michael Broggie, Carl Foote, Travis Gallup, Paul Hartman, Eric Hartman-Birge, Marcus Kaufman, Peter Kaufman, Pamela Koch, Carol Loomis, Steve Mull, Doerthe Obert, Scott Rule, Whitney Tilson, Dwight Tompkins, and Ed Wexler. If you enjoy reading Poor Charlie’s Almanack half as much as we enjoyed putting it together, we will consider our efforts a distinct success. In every respect, but particularly in our interactions with Charlie, his family, and the Mungers’ wide circle of friends and associates, we have been favored with calm skies and smooth sailing in the production of this book. We hope our efforts have proven worthy of our subject, a good and admirable man.